StoicNaturalPhilosophy(PhysicsandCosmology) 125
of the rather technical aspects of Stoic physical doctrine. In partic-
ular, the Stoic themes of the unity and cohesion of the cosmos and
of an all-encompassing divine reason controlling the cosmos are of
fundamentalimportancetoStoicphysics.
2. what physics is
DiogenesreportsthattheStoicsdividedtheirphysicaldoctrineinto
topicspertainingtobodies,principles(archai),elements(stoicheia),
gods,boundariesorlimits(perata),place,andvoid.This,hesays,was
a‘specific’classificationofphysicaltopics.A‘generic’classification
distinguished physical topics pertaining to the cosmos, those per-
tainingtotheelements(stoicheiaagain),andthosepertainingtothe
investigation of causes (aitiologia).3 It is thus clear that the Stoics
conceived of physics or natural philosophy more broadly than one
characterization of it by Aristotle – that is, the conceptual investi-
gation of kineˆsis (motion or change) and of whatever is implied by
change(e.g.,magnitude,place,andtime).4 Asamajorsubdivisionof
philosophy, Stoic physics includes not only what later came to be
called ‘natural philosophy’, but also cosmology and topics in ‘first
philosophy’ormetaphysics.
With respect to the former, ‘specific’ classificatory schema, the
distinctionbetweenprinciplesandelementsmayinitiallyseempuz-
zlingsince‘archai’and‘stoicheia’arenotinfrequentlyusedassyn-
onyms–asinAristotle’sfrequentcharacterizationofthePresocratic
philosophers’ quest for archai kai stoicheia and in the geometrical
senseof‘elements’(stoicheia).ItiswidelyattestedthatthetwoStoic
archai–whichwillbediscussedmorelater–wereanactiveprinciple
(topoioun)identifiedwithreasonandgod(interalia),andapassive
principle(topaschon)identifiedwithunqualifiedsubstance(apoios
ousia)ormatter.Diogenesreportsthattheprincipaldistinctionthat
3 DL VII 132. The import of the distinction between the ‘specific’ and ‘generic’
classification is far from obvious. In Ch. 8 of this volume, Brunschwig suggests
thatperhapsthespecificclassification‘considersphysicsasaself-containedeidos,
whereasthe[genericclassification]considersitaspartofabroadergenos,’andthus
envisionsthat‘someofthetopicsinthe‘generic’division,e.g.,cosmologyandaitiol-
ogy,aresharedamongphysicsandotherdisciplines,likeastronomyandmedicine’.
I certainly have not been able to come up with a more plausible account of the
distinction.
4 SeeAristotle,Phys.III4.202b30–1.126 michael j. white
the Stoics drew between archai and stoicheia is that whereas the
formerprinciplesareungeneratedandindestructible,thelatterele-
ments–whichareidentifiedintermsofthetraditionalcategoriesof
fire,water,air,andearth–aredestroyedintheworldconflagration
or ekpuroˆsis.5 Principles, in common Stoic usage, are the more ba-
sicontologicalconcepts,whereaselementsoccupyamorederivative
cosmological(andcosmogonical)position.Butthereareanumberof
problems, discussed in a later section, with respect to the relation
betweenprinciplesandelements.
TheStoicsalsorecognizedadistinctionbetweencosmologicalis-
suesoflegitimateconcerntomathematicians;thatis,issuesofwhat
might be termed mathematical astronomy on the one hand6 and
cosmological issues properly investigated by physicists as such on
the other: for example, what the ‘substance’ (ousia) of the cosmos
is, whether the sun and stars are constituted of matter and form,
whether or not the cosmos is generated, whether or not it is en-
souled,whetherornotitisdestructible,andwhetheritisproviden-
tially directed.7 A similar distinction between a mathematical and
anon-mathematicalinvestigationofcausesisreportedbyDiogenes.
Optics,catoptrics,andinvestigationofthecausesofclouds,thunder,
rainbows,halos,andcometsareadducedasexamplesoftheformer.8
Itisnotknownwhether‘mathematicalphysics’waspracticedamong
the Stoic philosophers themselves earlier than Posidonius. We do
have considerable evidence that Posidonius, in the first half of the
first-centuryb.c.,wasinvolvedinanextraordinarilywidevarietyof
scholarly,historical,andmathematicalandscientificpursuits.9
That bodies, principles, elements, gods, place, and void should
have been regarded as principal topics in Stoic physics is not sur-
prising.Thesearealltopicshavingeitheraself-evidentimportance
or a well-established pedigree in the natural philosophy of Greek
5 DLVII134.
6 SeeCh.13,Jones,thisvolume.
7 DLVII132–133.
8 DLVII133.
9 Among many other accomplishments, Posidonius wrote a book in defense of
Euclidean geometry against the attacks on geometry by the Epicurean Zeno of
Sidon.WithrespecttoPosidonius’lostbookOnOcean,I.G.Kiddcommentsthat
‘Posidonius’ book appears to have covered an astonishing span, not only in con-
tentbutalsoinform,rangingfrommathematicaltheorytothevividnarrativeof
Eudoxus’(Kidd[1988]vol.II(i),219–220).StoicNaturalPhilosophy(PhysicsandCosmology) 127
antiquity(orboth).However,itisperhapssurprisingorevenpuzzling
that perata (limits or boundaries) should be accorded such promi-
nence. There is more discussion on this matter toward the end of
thischapter.
3. the role of prior commitments
in stoic physics
The Stoic themes of the unity and cohesion of the cosmos and
of an all-encompassing divine reason controlling that cosmos may
be regarded as the principal controlling ‘prior commitments’ of
Stoic physics, to borrow a concept that Lang applies to Aristotle’s
physics.10Thesethemesdomuch,inotherwords,toshapethetypes
of issues and problems that Stoic physics takes to be important,
as well as the substance of what the Stoics have to say about these
issuesandproblems.Ofcourse,thisinfluenceisnotamatterofcom-
pletely setting the agenda of Stoic physics. But a case can be made
that prior commitments are even more important for Stoic physics
thantheyareforthephysicsofAristotle.
ForAristotle,notonlyhuman(sense)experienceintheformofta
phainomena,butalsotaendoxa(how‘we’,themany,aswellasthe
fewwiseonesamongus,thinkandtalkabouttheworldaroundus)
exerciseanimportantregulativefunctioninnaturalphilosophy.The
Stoics, however, apparently were much more ready to depart from
customary modes of thought and speech. Critics from outside the
school,suchasPlutarch,makemuchoftheviewsoftheStoicsthat
contradict ‘common conceptions’. Cicero notes that certain Stoic
doctrines, which he calls ‘admirabilia contraque opinionem om-
nium’ (‘astonishing and contrary to the beliefs of all people’), are
termed ‘paradoxa’ by the Stoics themselves.11 While the paradoxa
discussedbyCiceroareethicalandepistemological,thereiscertainly
evidence for a similar approach by the Stoics to physical topics –
for example, Chrysippus’ claim, in connection with the doctrine
of total blending (krasis di’ holoˆn), that a little wine thrown into
the sea will interpenetrate with the whole sea.12 In fact, Plutarch’s
spokesperson, Diadumenus in De communibus notitiis adversus
10 Lang(1998),280etpassim.
11 Cicero,ParadoxaStoicorum4.
12 Plutarch,Comm.not.1078e.128 michael j. white
Stoicos, emphasizes that the physical doctrines of the Stoics are
fullyasmuchatoddswith‘commonconceptions’(koinaiproleˆpseis)
as are their ethical doctrines.13 It is not clear that the Stoics, such
as Chrysippus, who are Plutarch’s targets, would have agreed with
thisassessment.However,acasecanbemadethatoneconsequence
of the relative detachment by the Stoics of physical inquiry from
common conceptions is the enlargement of the role of prior com-
mitmentsinnaturalphilosophy.Moreover,anadditionalfactorthat
couldheightentheinfluenceofpriorcommitmentsintheinvestiga-
tionofnatureisthefactthat,fortheStoics,knowledgeofthenatural
world is not sought as an end in itself, but rather as enabling us to
liveinconformitywithnature.
Followingisadiscussiononthisinfluencewithrespecttocertain
keyfeaturesofStoicphysicaldoctrine.Thisiscertainlynottheonly
waytoapproachStoicphysics.Nor,perhaps,isitthemostdiscrimi-
natingapproach:somesubtletiesanddifficultiesareglossedover,as
are some significant differences among the doctrines of individual
Stoic philosophers. But it is hoped that the method is particularly
usefulforabriefintroductoryandprotrepticdiscussionsuchasthe
presentone.
4. corporealism and vitalism
Hahm begins the first chapter of his The Origins of Stoic Cosmol-
ogy with the observation that ‘no idea is more deeply ingrained in
Stoic philosophy than the conviction that everything real is corpo-
real’.14 This seems quite correct, but two qualifications probably
should be added. The first is that ‘everything real’ here designates
whatexists(taonta).TheStoicshadawidercategoryof‘something’
(ti)thatincluded,inadditiontowhatexists(bodies),incorporealsor
‘subsistents’ (ta huphestoˆta) such as void, place, time, and what is
‘sayable’(talekta:meanings).15 Thesecondqualificationisthatthe
Stoic conception of the corporeality of the cosmos does not at all
connote the corporeal world of inert matter of seventeenth- and
eighteenth-century natural philosophy, aptly described by Randall
as a world consisting solely of ‘solid, hard, massy particles, of
13 Comm.not.1073d.
14 Hahm(1977),3.
15 SeeCh.8,Brunschwig,thisvolume.StoicNaturalPhilosophy(PhysicsandCosmology) 129
substancesconnectedbymechanicalcausation.’16TheStoics,onthe
contrary,followedtheprecedentofvariousPresocraticsandofPlato
inholdingthatthe‘wholecosmosisalivingbeing(oranimal:zoˆion),
ensouled and rational, having as its ruling principle (heˆgemonikon)
aether [typically equated with fire by the Stoics]’.17 According to
Chrysippus and Posidonius, ‘reason (nous) extends to every part of
it, just as soul does with respect to us’.18 Also quite unremarkable
is the Stoic doctrine that the cosmos is one, limited, and spheri-
cal. Like Aristotle, they held that it contains no void. But they ad-
ducedasthereasonforthisthe‘conspiration’or‘breathingtogether’
(sumpnoia) and ‘tension’ (suntonia) binding together heavenly and
terrestrialthings.19
What is most remarkable about this ‘vitalism’ is that the Stoics
evidentlyinsistedthattheactive,life-giving,rational,creative,and
directiveprincipleofthecosmosisjustascorporealasisthepassive,
‘material’ principle. According to the report of Aristocles (itself re-
portedbyEusebius),ZenoofCitium(likeHeraclitus)heldthatfireis
thestoicheionofeverything,and(likePlato)heheldthatthearchai
of fire are matter and god; ‘but he [Zeno] says that both are bodies,
theactiveandthepassiveprinciple,while[Plato]saysthatthefirst
activecauseisimmaterial’.20Origenalsocommentsonthecorpore-
alityofthe‘godoftheStoics’,attributingtotheStoicsthedoctrine
that,duringtheperiodicconflagration(ekpuroˆsis)ofthecosmos,‘the
ruling part [i.e., god] is the whole substance’, but during the inter-
veningcosmiccycle(diakosmeˆsis)therulingpart‘existsinapartof
it’.21 Origen here refers to the distinctive Stoic doctrine of cosmic
cycles. According to Diogenes Laertius, god, ‘being the “demiurge”
of the cosmic cycle, in certain periods of time consumes the whole
substance [sc., of the cosmos] into himself and then again brings it
forth from himself’.22 Thus, god as deˆmiourgos or craftsman is im-
manentinthecosmosasitsactive,rational,andcorporealprinciple,
and is particularly identified with the creative fire (pur technikon)
16 Randall(1962),Vol.1,60.
17 DLVII139.
18 DLVII138.
19 DLVII140.
20 AristoclesapudEusebius,PraeparatioevangelicaXV=SVF1.98.
21 Origen,ContraCelsumIV14=SVF2.1052.
22 DLVII137.130 michael j. white
from which the world cycle arises and into which it periodically
returns.
TheStoicconceptionoftheactiveprincipleofthecosmosascor-
porealelicitedstrongobjectionsfromlaterphilosophers.According
to one such objection, versions of which are found in Plutarch and
Plotinus,theStoics’identificationofgodwith‘intellectualbody’or
‘nousinmatter’makesgodintoacompositeofformandmatterand
thus compromises the status of God as a simple first principle, or
archeˆ.23 Thus,Plutarchconcludesthat
if reason and matter are one and the same, [the Stoics] have not correctly
defined matter as irrational. But if they are different, god would be a sort
oftrusteeofbothandnotsimplebutacompositething–corporealityfrom
matteraddedtorationality.24
As Plotinus’ version of the argument makes clear, the underly-
ing assumption is that ‘body comes to be from matter and form’.25
However,thereislittlereasontobelievethattheStoicswouldhave
accepted this presupposition.26 The common Stoic definitions of a
body, ‘that which is extended in the three dimensions of length,
breadth,anddepth’27and‘extensioninthreedimensionsalongwith
resistance (antitupia)’,28 do not appear to imply hylomorphism in
anything like the Aristotelian sense. In fact, the Stoics argued – in
thewordsofHahm–that‘iftheconstituentmaterialofathingisa
body,thethingitselfisabody’.29 Theyseemtohaveemployedthis
principle to conclude that qualities of corporeal things are them-
selvescorporeal.30
23 Plutarch,Comm.not.1085b.
24 Comm.not.1085c.
25 Plotinus,EnneadesVI1.26.12.
26 InthewordsofM.Lapidge,‘theinseparabilityoftheosandhuleˆisafeatureofStoic
cosmologywhichcannotbetoostronglyemphasized:itisassertedbyAlexanderof
Aphrodisias,Origen,Proclus,andSyrianus.Calcidiustooemphasizesthisfeature
ofStoicmonismatlength’(Lapidge[1973],243–4).
27 DLVII135.
28 Galen,Quodqualitatesincorporeaesint10=SVF2.381.
29 Hahm(1977),4.
30 Thereissomeevidence(e.g.,SVF2.376and379)foraStoicdoctrineaccordingto
whichaqualityis‘matterexistingorbeingdisposedinacertainway’(huleˆpoˆsec-
housa).However,asBrunschwighasemphasizedtome,theformerpassage(from
Plotinus)isquitepolemicalandthelatter(fromAlexanderofAphrodisias)isam-
bivalentaboutwhethertheStoicdoctrineisthatqualityishuleˆ poˆsechousaoris
thatqualityispneumapoˆsechon.AproblemhereisthatSimplicius(InAr.Cat.StoicNaturalPhilosophy(PhysicsandCosmology) 131
Similarconsiderationsapplytoanargumentagainstanunending
chain of movers attributed to the Stoics by Sextus Empiricus. The
consequenceofthisargumentisthatthereisa‘powerthatis,initself,
self-moving – which would be divine and eternal...So the power
thatmovesmatterandimposesonit,inanorderlyway,generations
andchangesiseternal.Consequently,itwouldbegod’.31 Notablein
its absence is any hint of the Aristotelian claim that a self-moving
movercannotbeanultimatemover.InthePhysicsAristotleargues
that
itisnecessary,therefore,thatwhatwhichmovesitselfconsistof(i)anun-
movedmover,and(ii)whatismovedbutnotnecessarilyamover,bothof
whichareincontacttheonewiththeother.32
And in Metaphysics XII, he draws the conclusion that an argu-
ment against an unending chain of movers has as a consequence
that‘thereexistssomesubstancethatiseternal,unmoved,andsep-
arate(kechoˆrismeneˆ)fromsensiblethings...Ithasbeenshownthat
thissubstancecannothaveanymagnitudebut,rather,ispartlessand
indivisible’.33
FromtheStoicperspective,the‘kechoˆrismeneˆ’(‘separate’)would
be especially crucial here. The Stoics surely would have resisted
anyargumentforafirstmoverthatiskechoˆrismenonfromthecos-
mos,justastheywouldhaveresistedtheargumentsbyPlutarchand
Plotinus that would entail that god – or the form or heˆgemonikon
of god – exists, in the words of Plotinus, as an ‘incorporeal creator’
(topoieˆtikonasoˆmaton).34 Thereasonforthisresistanceliesinthe
Stoicconvictionthatsomethingincorporealcannotactnorbeacted
upon.CiceroreportsthatZenodeniedthat‘anythingcouldbeacted
upon by that which is incorporeal – as Xenocrates and other older
thinkers as well had said of the soul; rather, it is not at all possible
66–67=SVF2.369)reportsaStoicschemaofcategoriesthatappearstodistinguish
qualitiesfrompoˆsechonta(dispositions)andprostipoˆsechonta(relativedisposi-
tions).Ontheotherhand,Simplicius(InAr.Cat.214=SVF2.391)alsoreportsthat
theStoicsrefertoqualitiesas‘hekta’which,ofcourse,comesfromthesameverb
(echein)asdoes‘disposition’or‘beingdisposedissuch-and-suchaway’(poˆsechon).
Theprincipalpoint,Ibelieve,istherefusaloftheStoicstoadmitan‘ontological
separation’betweenthecorporeal‘subject’ofaqualityandthe‘qualityitself’.
31 S.E.,MIX76=SVF2.311.
32 Aristotle,Phys.VIII5.258a18–21.
33 Aristotle,Meta.XII7.1073a3–7.
34 Plotinus,Enn.VI1.26.14–15.132 michael j. white
for what is not body to act upon anything or to be acted upon’.35
This stricture, in fact, becomes a common Stoic characterization
of the corporeal, ‘that which either acts or is acted upon’, which
Hahmrightlycharacterizesas‘themostimportant’Stoicaccountof
body.36
Althoughtheevidenceisbynomeansconclusive,itseemslikely
thattheStoicshadtakentoheartPeripateticworriesaboutthecausal
efficacyof‘separate’Platonicforms.ButanAristotelianincorporeal
unmoved mover that is kechoˆrismenon from what it moves might
well seem to generate a similar problem, particularly if Aristotle’s
explanation, ‘[a final cause] moves as the object of desire but other
thingsmovebybeingmoved’,37 isnotdeemedtoconstituteasatis-
factoryaccountofthecausalactionofsomething.
Thehistoryofnon-monisticontologies,suchasthedevelopment
of various dualisms in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
records the difficulties of adequately explaining the interaction of
two toto caelo different kinds of entity. In fact, developments such
as Malebranche’s occasionalism suggest that such a dualism tends
to issue not in a picture of a single world order, but rather that of
multiplecoexistentworldordersmoreorlessdetachedfromonean-
other.IfAristotleisthoughttohaveattemptedtounifytheseparate
worldordersofPlatonicdualism,itiseasytointerprettheStoicsas
beginning with the assumption that Aristotelianism had not gone
farenoughinthisdirection.Hahmcommentsthat
obviously, what the Stoics have done is . . . to distribute [Aristotle’s] four
causesbetweentwoentities,assigningthematerialcausetooneentity[the
passivearcheˆ],andmotive,formal,andfinalcausestotheother[theactive
archeˆ].38
Since the active principle is corporeal, the Stoic prior commit-
ment to the unity and cohesion of the cosmos is preserved. There
areno‘separate’principlesorcausestheconnectionofwhichtothe
materialworldordermightproveproblematic.
The causal efficacy of the active principle is certainly exercised
locally,notmerelyby‘superficial’contactbutbyasortoftotalper-
meationandpervasion.AccordingtoAlexanderofAphrodisias,the
35 Cicero,Acad.I39.
36 Hahm(1977),11.SeeBrunschwig,Ch.8,thisvolume.
37 Aristotle,Meta.XII71072b3–4(translatingtheemendationofRoss).
38 Hahm(1977),44.StoicNaturalPhilosophy(PhysicsandCosmology) 133
Stoics say that ‘god is mixed with matter, permeating (diheˆkonta)
through all of it, shaping and forming it, and in this way making
thecosmos’.39 AndChrysippusisdescribedbyDiogenesLaertiusas
holdingthat‘nouspermeates(diheˆkontos)througheverypartof[the
cosmos], just as the soul does with respect to us, although more in
someplacesandlessinothers’.40 Astheparadigmofcorporealcau-
sation, then, the action of the active, productive principle is local
and, in a sense, ‘by contact.’ But the contact is ‘contact through-
out’ and is not the ‘mechanical’ efficient causation associated with
seventeenth- and eighteenth-century conceptions of corporeal cau-
sation: one billiard ball colliding with another or the intermeshing
gears of a clock. A biological rather than a mechanical picture of
corporeal causation is a more appropriate illustration of the Stoic
concept: the corporeal and local but pervasive action of the bodily
humors or fluids as described, for example, in the Hippocratic trea-
tiseDenaturahominis.41
5. principles, elements, god, and world cycles
The fundamental prior commitment to cosmic unity and cohesion
iscertainlymanifestintheStoicaccountoftheconstituentsofthe
cosmos. However, there are opposing tensions which, in combina-
tionwiththedearthoffragmentaryevidencewepossessconcerning
Stoicphysicaldoctrine,giverisetointerpretiveproblems.
Severalproblemsarise,tobeginwith,concerningtherelationbe-
tweentheapparentlymoreontologicallyfundamentalprinciples(ar-
chai) and the apparently less ontologically fundamental elements
(stoicheia). One obvious problem pertains to the status of fire. It is
sometimesidentifiedwiththeactiveprincipleorgodanddesignated
‘creativefire’(purtechnikon).Plutarchquotesfromthefirstbookof
Chrysippus’OnProvidence:
Whenthecosmosisfierythroughout,itissimplyitsownsoulandcontrol-
ling principle (heˆgemonikon). But when it has changed into water and the
soulthatisretainedinit,itinacertainwayhaschangedintobodyandsoul
soastobecompoundedofthem;thenithasanotherstructure.42
39 AlexanderofAphrodisas,Mixt.11=SVF2.310.
40 DLVII138.
41 OeuvresComple`tesd’Hippocrate,ed.E´.Littre´,Vol.6(1849;repr.1962),32–68.
42 Plutarch,St.rep.1053b=SVF2.605.134 michael j. white
Similarly,Origenreportsthat‘thegodoftheStoicshasthewhole
of substance (teˆn holeˆn ousian) as its controlling principle, when-
ever there is the conflagration. But when there is the world cycle
(diakosmeˆsis), he comes to be in part of it’.43 The problem is that
other sources indicate that god or the active principle ‘generated,
first of all, the four elements fire, water, air, and earth’.44 As a cre-
atedandapparentlydestructibleelement,firewouldthenhaveasub-
sidiary ontological and cosmogonical status. A distinction reported
in Stobaeus seems to be intended to deal with the problem: ‘there
aretwokindsoffire:oneisuncreativeandchangesitsnourishment
[i.e., fuel] into itself; the other is creative, the cause of growth and
preservation,asitdoesinplantsandanimals,whereitistheir“na-
ture” (phusis) and soul. This is the sort of fire that is the substance
ofthestars’.45
A further problem with respect to the role of principles versus
elements is that ‘breath’ or pneuma is frequently accorded an ac-
tive,directivefunctionwithrespecttonaturalprocesses.Pneumais
frequently characterized as constituted of the elements of fire and
air.Accordingtooneaccount,itisidentifiedwiththe‘stablecondi-
tion’ (hexis) that constitutes the characteristic nature of inanimate
things–alsowiththe‘nature’orphusisofplants,withthesoulofani-
mals,andwiththerationalsoulofhumans.46Inanaccountgivenby
Nemesius, this is explicated in terms of a ‘tensile motion’ (tonikeˆ
kineˆsis) ‘which moves simultaneously inwards and outwards, the
outward movement producing quantities and qualities and the in-
ward one unity and substance’.47 In his Physics of the Stoics,
Sambursky has interpreted this Stoic concept as an anticipation of
the later conception of ‘force field’ in Western physics,48 a read-
ing that has not received universal approbation. But Sambursky is
surelycorrectinemphasizingthecosmologicalroleofthe‘pneuma-
like tonos [in making] the cosmos into a single cohesive unit’.49
43 Origen,ContraCelsumIV14=SVF2.1052.
44 DLVII136.
45 Stobaeus,Ecl.I25.3=SVF1.120.
46 SeePhiloofAlexandria,Quoddeussitimmutabilis35=SVF2.458.
47 NemesiusofEmesa,Denaturahominis70–71(intranslationofLongandSedley
[1987],Vol.1,47J,283).
48 Sambursky(1959),31–32.
49 Sambursky (1959), 5. See Clement of Alexandria, Strom. V 8 = SVF 2.447; and
AlexanderofAphrodisias,Mixt.10=SVF2.441.StoicNaturalPhilosophy(PhysicsandCosmology) 135
Although the details are probably forever lost, it seems clear that
theStoicpneumatikostonosfunctions,inpart,asatechnicalexpres-
sionofthefundamentalStoicpriorcommitmenttocosmicunityand
coherence.
However,theproblemremainsthatpneumaseemsoftentofunc-
tion in much the way that the active principle (creative fire or god)
does – whereas its ontological status appears to be not even that
of an element, but rather a synthesis of elements. Part of the prob-
lemhere–aswithrespecttotheontologicalstatusoffire–maybe
the exiguous quantity and polemical quality of our evidence. Part
of the problem may be differences, now difficult to reconstruct ac-
curately, among various Stoic thinkers. Yet it seems reasonable to
suppose that a third part of the problem is that of assimilating pre-
existing traditions of natural philosophy and physical explanation
intothemonisticontologicalframeworkdemandedbyfundamental
Stoiccommitmentstocosmicunityandcohesion.
Onesuchearliertraditionisthatofthefourelementsor‘roots’–
fire,air,water,andearth.FortheStoics,thesearecertainlynot‘ele-
mental’inthesensethateachisafundamental, suigeneriskindof
matter,whichisincapableofbeingtransformedintoorcoming-to-be
outofanyoftheotherfourelements.Butneitherweretheelements
‘elemental’,inthisratherstrongsense,foreitherPlatoorAristotle.
According to the doctrine of Aristotle’s De generatione et corrup-
tioneII3,eachofthefourelementsisthecombinationofoneeach
oftheopposingpairsofqualities,cold/hotandwet/dry:earthiscold
and dry, water cold and wet, air hot and wet, and fire hot and dry.
In Meteorologica IV, Aristotle characterizes hot and cold as active,
wet and dry as passive qualities, commenting that the ‘congealing’
(sunkritikon)forwhichthehotandthecoldareresponsibleisaway
ofbeingactive.50
According to Diogenes Laertius, the Stoics associated fire with
‘thehot’,waterwith‘thewet’,airwith‘thecold’,andearthwith‘the
dry’.51 They too apparently distinguished active (drastika) and pas-
siveelements:airandfireareactive,earthandwaterarepassive.52It
transpiresthat,intermsoftheStoicpairingsofthequalitativeoppo-
siteswiththeelements,thisschemamakescoldandhotactive,wet
50 Meteor.IV1.378b21–23.
51 DLVII136.
52 Nemesius,Denat.hom.164=SVF2.418.136 michael j. white
and dry passive – just as Aristotle had done in the Meteorologica.
According to Aristotle’s more complex pairings between qualities
and elements, active and passive qualities are distributed over all
fourelements.ThechangemadebytheStoicsallowsthemtoasso-
ciate the active principles of cold and hot – which, as Galen points
out, are particularly appropriate active principles if one tends to
think of change in terms of alteration of density or rarefaction and
contraction53 – with the elements fire and air, of which pneuma or
‘hotbreath’isconstituted.ItseemsplausiblethattheStoicsadapted
Aristotelian element theory to make it better conform to the doc-
trineoftheagencyofpneumatikostonos.However,therelationbe-
tween pneuma and ‘creative fire’ remains obscure. It may be that,
as Lapidge has suggested, the former actually replaced the latter as
anaccountofthecosmicactiveprincipleoraspect.54 Whateverthe
case,itseemsclearthat,despitethedisdainoftheircritics,theStoics
wishedtomaintainthecorporealityofthecosmicactiveprinciple.
As the Eleatics had demonstrated, it is exceptionally difficult to
‘do cosmology’ with a rigorously monistic vocabulary – whether or
not the monism in question is materialistic. This difficulty might
callintoquestiontheverycoherenceoftheenterprise.ButtheStoics
didnotseemtoworrytoomuchabouttheissueandchose,instead,to
conscriptthedualisticorpluralisticvocabularyoftraditionalGreek
cosmology,medicine,andtheology.Onceone,asaStoic,hascometo
understandtheessentialunityandcohesionof‘thewhole’,itmight
seemconsiderablylesssignificantwhichofthefollowingtermsone
uses to designate the ‘active aspect’ of that essentially corporeal
whole: pur, to heˆgemonikon, pneuma, theos, nous, sperma, hexis,
or tonikeˆ kineˆsis. Although there are contextual differences, subtle
ornotsosubtle,amongtheseterms,thereisasenseinwhichoneis
referring to the same (corporeal) thing or ‘stuff’ by all of them; and
oneisconnotingthatstuffunderitsactiveaspect.55
53 Galen,Denaturalibusfacultatibus106=SVF2.406.
54 LapidgesuggeststhatChrysippusintroducedpneumaasactiveprincipleor‘aspect’
of the cosmos, perhaps partly to resolve cosmological problems in the thought
of Zeno and Cleanthes: ‘It will be seen at once that the adoption of pneuma as
centralagentintheStoiccosmologywouldcausethedistinctionswehavebeen
considering–thatbetweenarcheˆ andstoicheion,andthatbetweenpurtechnikon
andpuratechnon–tobeabandoned’(Lapidge[1973],273).
55 ThisisafeatureofwhatsomecontemporaryscholarshavetermedStoic‘nominal-
ism’.Inparticular,Stoicmonisticmaterialismvirtuallyguaranteesthat,inmanyStoicNaturalPhilosophy(PhysicsandCosmology) 137
Another illustration of Stoic accommodation of ontological
monism to more conventional ways of thinking and speaking
aboutrealityisfoundinonefeatureoftheStoicdoctrineofcosmic
cycles. For a monist such as Spinoza, the identity of god and
nature is axiomatic.56 For orthodox Stoics, the doctrine of cosmic
cycles allows them to ‘qualify’ this identity to a degree. During
the phase of conflagration or ekpuroˆsis within a cosmic cycle,
god may be regarded as completely existing ‘in himself’, so to
speak. As a passage from Origen, quoted previously, puts it, ‘the
god of the Stoics has the whole of substance (teˆn holeˆn ousian) as
its controlling principle, whenever there is the conflagration’.57
Plutarch indicates that within this phase, deity exists in its purest
form:duringtheconflagration‘noevilwhatsoeverremains,butthe
whole is then sagacious and wise’.58 This ‘god-phase’ of the cosmic
cycle imparts a quasi-transcendence to god and allows the Stoics
more naturally to speak of deity as the creator of the world order –
as the ‘creative fire that proceeds systematically to the creation of
the cosmos encompassing all the seminal principles (spermatikous
logous) according to which everything comes about by fate’59 and
as ‘a sort of seed, which possesses the principles of all things and
the causes of all things that have occurred, are occurring, and will
occur – the interweaving and ordering of which is fate, knowledge,
truth,andacertaininevitableandinescapablelawofthethingsthat
exist’.60
During the remainder of the world cycle, however, god is im-
manent in the cosmos as its soul or rational, controlling principle.
According to Plutarch’s report, Chrysippus claims that ‘the soul of
the cosmos is not separated but continuously grows until it con-
sumes its matter into itself’.61 At this juncture, the conflagrational
god-phase of the world cycle apparently recurs. Thus, the temporal
phases of the world cycle permit the orthodox Stoics to maintain
their monistic commitment to the unity and cohesion of what
instances,adifferenceinlinguisticexpressionsdoesnotcorrespondtoadifference
inthereferentsofthoseexpressions.
56 SeeA.A.Long,Ch.15,thisvolume.
57 Origen,ContraCelsumIV14=SVF2.1052.
58 Plutarch,Comm.not.1067a=SVF2.606.
59 Ae¨tius,PlacitaI7=SVF2.1027.
60 AristoclesinEusebius,Pr.ev.XV=SVF1.98.
61 Plutarch,St.rep.1052c=SVF2.604.138 michael j. white
existsbyidentifyinggodandcosmos,whileallottingtogodaphase
whereheismanifestedinquasi-transcendentalperfection.
6. causation and cosmic cohesion
Aswehaveseen,theunityandcohesionofthecosmosisafunction
oftheactiveprinciple,godorcreativefire;andtheactionofthelatter
is typically identified with fate (heimarmeneˆ). In Cicero’s De fato,
fate is identified with ‘antecedent causes’ (‘natural and antecedent
causes’ or ‘external and antecedent causes’), which are character-
izedas‘assistingandproximatecauses’(causaeadiuvantesetproxi-
mae)anddistinguishedfrom‘completeandprincipalcauses’(causae
perfectae et principales). One aim of Chrysippus in making these
distinctionsappearstohavebeenthedevelopmentofaformof‘soft-
determinist’compatibilism,atopicdiscussedinChapter7.
Inthischapter,however,theconcernismorewiththedetermin-
ismChrysippusevidentlyassociatedwithhisconceptofantecedent
causes. At De fato 20–21, Chrysippus is portrayed as arguing by
modus tollens from the premises that every proposition (axioˆma)
is true or false and that if there is motion without a cause (motus
sine causa), then not every proposition will be true or false to the
conclusion that there is no motion without a cause. He then in-
fers that everything that happens by preceding causes (causis fiunt
antegressis)and,consequently,thateverythinghappensbyfate.Itis
clearthatanimportantassumptionofChrysippus’argumentisthat
the truth or falsity of propositions with future signification entails
theexistenceofantecedentcausesthatbringabout(orpreclude,re-
spectively) the states of affairs that would make those propositions
true(orfalse,respectively).
TheStoicaccountoffateasa‘chainofcauses(i.e.,anunalterable
ordering and concatenation’)62 is characterized by Quintus Cicero,
theStoicspokespersoninCicero’sDedivinatione,asbeingamatter
ofphysics,notsuperstition.63ApassageinAlexanderofAphrodisias’
relates the Stoic conception of an all-encompassing causal nexus
quite directly to Stoic concern with the unity and cohesion of the
cosmos:
62 Ae¨tius,Placita I28=SVF2.917.
63 Cicero,Div.I126.StoicNaturalPhilosophy(PhysicsandCosmology) 139
Nothingcomestobeintheuniverseinsuchawaythatthereisnotsome-
thing else which follows it with no alternative and is attached to it as to
a cause; nor, on the other hand, can any of the things which come to be
subsequentlybedisconnectedfromthethingswhichhavecometobeprevi-
ously,soasnottofollowoneofthemasifboundtoit.Buteverythingwhich
hascometobeisfollowedbysomethingelsewhichofnecessitydependson
itasacause,andeverythingwhichcomestobehassomethingprecedingit
towhichitisconnectedasacause.Fornothingeitherisorcomestobein
theuniversewithoutacause,becausethereisnothingofthethingsinitthat
is separated and disconnected (apolelumenon te kai kechoˆrismenon) from
allthethingsthathavepreceded.Fortheuniversewouldbetornapartand
dividedandnotremainsingleforever,organizedaccordingtoasingleorder
andorganization,ifanycauselessmotionwereintroduced;anditwouldbe
introduced,ifallthethingsthatareandcometobedidnothavecauseswhich
havecometobebeforehand(progegonota=antecedentes)[and]whichthey
followofnecessity.64
A few lines later, Alexander states the fundamental principle of
Stoicdeterminism:
It is equally true with respect to all [of the sorts of cause that the Stoics
distinguish],theysay,thatitisimpossible,whenallthecircumstancessur-
rounding(periesteˆkotoˆn)boththecauseandthatofwhichitisacauseare
thesame,thatthingsshouldnotturnoutacertainwayononeoccasionbut
thattheyshouldturnoutthatwayonsomeotheroccasion.Ifthiswereto
bethecase,[theysaythat]therewouldbesomeuncausedmotion.65
Suchaprinciplehasbecomevirtuallyparadigmaticasastatement
of causal determinism. It is regarded by the Stoics as a corollary of
their commitments to the unity and cohesion of the cosmos and
to an all-encompassing divine reason controlling that cosmos. And
theprincipleofdeterminismitselfhasascorollariestwosignificant
Stoic physical doctrines: ‘nonevident’, ‘obscure’, or ‘hidden’ (adeˆla)
causalfactors,andtheeternalrecurrenceoftheworldorder.
Itisaplainfactthatthisprincipleofuniversalcausaldeterminism
doesnotseemtobetruewithoutexception:thatis,itdoesnotseem
to be universally the case that when all the relevant causal factors
are the ‘same’, there is always the same outcome. A very obvious
move, for those such as the Stoics whose prior commitments lead
64 AlexanderofAphrodisias,Fat192,3–14(inthetranslationofSharples[1983]70–
71).
65 Fat.192,22–25.140 michael j. white
themtoembracetheprincipleinastrictlyuniversalform,istointro-
duce the concept of causal features that are difficult (or practically
impossible) to detect but are sufficiently significant to produce dif-
ferent effects depending on their presence or absence. That the
Stoics adopted such an account of chance (tucheˆ) is attested by a
number of citations taken from von Arnim’s collection, Stoicorum
VeterumFragmenta:chanceisa‘causenonevidenttohumancalcula-
tion/thought/reason’(aitiaadeˆlosanthroˆpinoˆilogismoˆi/anthroˆpineˆi
dianoiaˆi/anthroˆpinoˆi logoˆi).66 In his De Stoicorum repugnantiis,
Plutarch makes it clear that Chrysippus appealed to such nonevi-
dentcauseswithinthecontextofhisstrictcausaldeterminism.Just
as nonevident causes effect different outcomes with respect to the
behavior of balances and scales, ‘we do not notice them when they
directourownimpulseonewayortheother’.67Itisessentiallythese
sameaitiaiadeˆloithatreappearinthephenomenawithwhichcon-
temporary chaos theory is concerned, where minute differences in
‘initialconditions’–thatis,‘causalnoise’–canyieldgreatdifferences
in effects. With respect to many of the Stoics, one consequence of
thedoctrineofnonevidentcausesseemstohavebeenacertainret-
icence about the development of causal explanations of particular
natural phenomena. Commenting on a remark of Strabo pertaining
to Posidonius (‘With him [sc. Posidonius] we find a lot of aetiology
and a lot of Aristotelizing which members of our school shy away
frombecauseoftheobscurityofthecauses’68),Fredecommentsthat
‘according to Strabo, then, the Stoics in general are hesitant to en-
gageinaetiologybecausetherealcausesaresohiddenandobscure;
Posidonius is an exception, and in this respect he is rather more
likeaPeripatetic’.69 Fredefurthernotesthata‘recurringcomplaint’
againstChrysippusinGalen’sDeplacitisHippocratisetPlatonisis
thathe‘failstostatethecauseorclaimsthatthetrueexplanationis
uncertainortoodifficulttofigureout’.70
Although, according to Chrysippus, it may be quite difficult to
work out the aetiology of particular events and states of affairs,
the commitment to cosmic unity and coherence in the form of the
66 SeeSVF2.965,2.966,2.967,2.970,and2.971.
67 Plutarch,St.rep.1045c.
68 Strabo,GeographicaII3.8.23–25.
69 Frede(1987),130.
70 Frede(1987),131.StoicNaturalPhilosophy(PhysicsandCosmology) 141
fundamental principle of determinism entails that there is such an
aetiology.Insofaraswecandetermine,commitmenttothisgeneral
physical principle, as an expression of cosmic unity and coherence,
was much more important to most Stoics than the limitations im-
posed on the explanation of particular physical phenomena by the
existence of ‘hidden’ causes. This feature of Stoic physical thought
underlines the general point that what the Stoics expected from
physics, as a principal subdivision of philosophy, is not the same
ideal of ‘explanation of nature’ attached to many classical modern
andcontemporaryconceptionsofphysics:anomic-deductivepicture
according to which the ‘covering laws’ of physics plus a complete
description of an instantaneous world-state allows an omniscient
observertopredictthesubsequenthistoryoftheworldtothefinest
detail.
Alsointimatelyrelatedtothefundamentalprincipleofdetermin-
ism is a Stoic doctrine we have previously encountered: eternally
recurring world orders or cosmic cycles. In one classical form, the
doctrineseemstohavebeenthatofexacteternalrecurrence:that,as
Nemesius puts it, ‘there will be nothing different in comparison to
whathashappenedbefore,buteverythingwilloccurinjustthesame
wayandindistinguishably,eventotheleastdetails’.71 Thisformof
the doctrine may well have been the most orthodox one because of
thefactthatitistheformthatseemstorespectmostrigorouslythe
Stoicprincipleofcausaldeterminism.Althoughtheprincipleofde-
terminismdoesnotentailthisdoctrineofexactrecurrence,theprin-
ciplewouldseemtoentailthatifthereoccursa‘totalstate’ yofthe
cosmos,indistinguishableinalldetailfromapriortotalcosmicstate
x,therewillbeaneternalrecyclingofcosmichistoryinbetween.It
seems likely that the Stoics appealed to the common ancient doc-
trineofthe‘greatyear’(annusmagnusorperfectus)tosupporttheir
assumptionthattheantecedentoftheconditionalissatisfied.This
doctrine,mentionedinPlato’sTimaeus(39d)andCicero’sDenatura
deorum (II 20), is that of the return of the heavenly bodies to their
exact relative positions. At Contra Celsum V 21, Origen attributes
suchadoctrinetothe‘PlatonistsandPythagoreans’inthecontextof
asortofastrologicaldeterminism:‘forwhenincertainfixedcycles
the stars adopt the same configurations and relationships to each
71 Nemesius,Denat.hom.38=SVF2.625.142 michael j. white
other,theysaythateverythingonearthisinthesamepositionasit
wasatthelasttimewhentherelationshipofthestarsintheuniverse
to one another was the same’.72 The same passage from Nemesius
citedpreviouslysuggeststhattheStoicsappropriatedthedoctrineof
thegreatyeartotheirownuse:
The Stoics say that when the planets return to the same position, with
respect to inclination and declination, to where each was at the begin-
ning when the cosmos was first established, at specified periods of time
they bring about the conflagration and destruction of things. And when
again the cosmos returns from the beginning to the same state, and when
again the heavenly bodies are similarly disposed, each thing that occurred
intheformerperiodwillcometopassindistinguishably[sc.,fromitspast
occurrence].73
As a number of contemporary commentators have noted, there
wereseveralvariantsoftheStoicdoctrineofeternalrecurrence.One
variant apparently was derived from consideration of the identity
ofindividuals,events,andsoforthacrosscosmiccycles.Simplicius
reports that the Stoics ‘reasonably ask whether the I [that exists]
nowandtheI[thatexisted]thenareoneinnumber,orwhetherIam
fragmented (diaphoroumai) by the ordering of cosmic cycles one to
thenext’.74Soavariantoftheorthodoxdoctrineofexactrecurrence
reported by Origen is that an individual such as Socrates ‘does not
cometobeagainbutanindistinguishablecounterpart(aparallaktos)
of Socrates, who will marry an indistinguishable counterpart of
Xanthippe,andwillbeprosecutedbyindistinguishablecounterparts
of Anytus and Meletus’.75 As Barnes has pointed out, this variant
appears to conflict with a principle of identity of indiscernibles
accepted by most Stoics.76 Plotinus seems to suggest restriction of
the principle of identity of indiscernibles to single cosmic cycles,77
but we do not know whether any Stoics adopted such a solution.
WealsodonotknowwhetheranyStoicsentertainedthedistinction
betweena‘conceptionoftimeascircular[withjustoneworldcycle
72 Origen,ContraCelsumV21(inthetranslationofChadwick[repr.1965]280).
73 Nemesius,Denat.hom.38=SVF2.625.SeeCh.1,Sedley,thisvolume,onother
PythagoreanizingaspectsofStoicism.
74 Simplicius,InAr.Phys.886.13–16=SVF2.627.
75 Origen,ContraCelsumIV68=SVF2.626.
76 Barnes(1978),10–11.
77 Plotinus,Enn.V7.221–23.StoicNaturalPhilosophy(PhysicsandCosmology) 143
‘joined’ at beginning and end by the ekpuroˆsis] and a conception of
timeaslinear...butinwhichacertainsequenceofevents/statesof
affairsisexactlyandeternallyrepeated’.78
Although these issues are rather rarefied, there is one further at-
tested variant of the doctrine of recurrence that strikes at the heart
of Stoic natural philosophy. This is a doctrine, reported by Origen
atContraCelsumV20,thatallowssomesmalldifferencesfromcy-
cle to cycle. Not surprisingly, Alexander interprets this doctrine in
Aristotelianterms–asallowingsomevariationfromcycletocycle
with respect to ‘accidental’ attributes.79 Barnes is surely correct in
noting that such a variant would amount to abandoning causal de-
terminism.Alsoplausibleishissuggestionthat,sincedeterminism
is so central to Stoic natural philosophy, such a heterodox doctrine
could only have been maintained by a minor figure in the school’s
history (‘par un personnage de peu d’importance dans l’histoire du
stoı¨cisme’).80
Withrespecttotherelationbetweeneternalrecurrenceanddeter-
minism,itisworthreemphasizingthepointthatbothdoctrineswere
considered by the Stoics as manifestations of the all-encompassing
divine reason controlling the cosmos. In the words of Long and
Sedley,
Itwouldbeamistake,however,tothinkofeverlastingrecurrenceasapurely
mechanical consequence of Stoic determinism. God is a supremely ratio-
nal agent, and the most interesting fact about the conflagration is its om-
nipresent instantiation of his providence...In his own identity god is the
causal nexus...; hence the sequence of cause and effect is an enactment
of divine rationality and providence. Since every previous world has been
excellent...,godcanhavenoreasontomodifyanysucceedingworld.81
TheStoics’commitmenttotheunityandcoherenceofthecosmos
as controlled by providential divine reason results in a deemphasis
onhumanautonomy,insofarassuchautonomywouldcompromise
thecohesivenessoftheuniverseandthehegemonyofdivinereason.
However, it seems that most Stoics wanted to allow some concep-
tion of human responsibility. The consequence is one of the first
78 White(1985),174.
79 AlexanderofAphrodisias,InAr.An.pr.181.25–31=SVF2.626.
80 Barnes(1978),10.
81 LongandSedley(1987),Vol.1,311.144 michael j. white
explicit occurrences of soft determinism in Western thought – that
is, the affirmation of the principle of causal determinism together
with a conception of ‘what is up to us’ (to eph’ heˆmin) considered
tobecompatiblewithdeterminism.CiceroreportsthatChrysippus
wished to ‘strike a middle position’ between those who hold ‘all
things happen by fate in such a way that fate bears the force of ne-
cessity’ and those who hold that the ‘motions of minds are volun-
tary and without any fate’.82 It is not clear whether Chrysippus or
otherStoicsdevelopedmorethanonestrategyforstakingoutasoft-
determinist middle ground. But it is clear that Cicero believed that
Chrysippus’ most important strategy involved distinguishing types
ofcause:‘sinceChrysippusbothrejectednecessityandwishednoth-
ing to transpire without preestablished causes (praepositis causis),
he distinguished kinds of causes so that he might escape necessity
butretainfate’.83
The Stoics were famous (or notorious) for distinguishing what
Alexander calls a whole ‘swarm of causes’ (smeˆnos aitioˆn),84 and it
seemslikelythattheprincipalmotivationbehindtheStoic‘investi-
gationintocauses’oraitiologiawastoworkouttheirsoftdetermin-
ism,whichpermitsthemtomaintaintheircommitmenttocosmic
unityintheformofaprincipleofuniversalcausaldeterminismwith-
outentirelysacrificingthecommonsensicalideathathumanagents,
atleastonsomeoccasions,areresponsiblefortheiractions.Despite
considerableclarificationprovidedbycontemporarycommentators,
the details of the various Stoic causal schemata remain controver-
sial.85 Nonetheless, Cicero makes it clear that the distinction be-
tween‘completeandprincipal’(perfectaeetprincipales)causesand
‘antecedent’causesthataresaidtobe‘assistingandproximate’(adi-
uvantesetproximae)iscrucialto(oneversionof)Chrysippeansoft
determinism.Theprincipalandperfectcausesseemtobethesame
thing as the distinctively Stoic ‘sustaining’ (sunhektika) causes,
whichClementalsoreferstoas‘complete’(autoteleˆ).86Asynekticor
sustaining cause apparently (1) necessitates its result; (2) is tempo-
rally coincidental with its result; and (3) is, in the words of Frede,
82 Cicero,Fat.39.
83 Fat.18.41.
84 AlexanderofAphrodisias,Fat.192,18.
85 See,inparticular,Bobzien(1998).
86 ClementofAlexandria,Strom.VIII9=SVF2.351.StoicNaturalPhilosophy(PhysicsandCosmology) 145
regardedbytheStoicsasa‘visontheinside[ofthethingpossessing
it],...somethingactive,somethingwhichexertsaforce’thatbrings
about its effect.87 There are several illustrations attributed by
CicerotoChrysippus:whereasacylinderandatop‘cannotbeginto
movewithoutbeingpushed,butwhenthishappens,hethinksthat
thecylindercontinuestorollandthetoptospinbytheirownnature
(suapte natura)’.88 It is this ‘nature’ that is the synektic cause of
thebehaviorofcylinderandtop.Andthisnatureisconceivedbythe
Stoicstobesomethingmorethanamerepassive,necessary‘standing
condition’.
ItisperhapspossibletoregardaStoicsynekticcauseassomething
analogous to a Peripatetic formal cause, something that accounts
forthecharacteristicbehavioror‘wayofbeing’ofitspossessor–al-
though,ofcourse,itisconceivedbytheStoicsasanactive,corporeal
principle.Inthecaseofhumanbehavior,CicerodepictsChrysippus
asmaintainingthatactsof‘assent’requireantecedentcausesinthe
form of sense impressions, but that such sense impressions are not
synektic causes of the acts of assent. Thus, the act of assent ‘will
be in our power’ (sed assensio nostra erit in potestate) because of
itsbeingtheeffectofsomesynekticcauseapparentlyexpressingour
rationalnature–‘inthewaythatitwasexplainedthat,withrespect
tothecylinder,althoughitwaspushedfromwithout,itnonetheless
movesbyitsownforceandnature’.89
Stoic accounts of ‘freedom and responsibility’ are discussed in
Chapter7.Mypresentinterestislimitedtoitsconnectionwiththe
Stoic commitment to cosmic unity and cohesion. Whereas a non-
Stoic incompatibilist such as Alexander is committed to locating
humanresponsibilityinacertaindegreeof‘causalseparation’ofthe
agentfromtherestofthecosmos,itisclearthattheStoiccommit-
menttocosmiccohesionanditscorollary,anall-encompassingprov-
idential cosmic reason, will not allow for a similar maneuver. Like
subsequent determinists such as Spinoza, orthodox Stoics shift the
emphasisfromhumanresponsibilitytohumanworthanddignity–
or reinterpret human responsibility in terms of worth and dignity.
It seems plausible to claim that human dignity or worth need not
requireanysortofcausalseparationofhumansfromtherestofthe
87 Frede(1987),140.
88 Cicero,Fat.42.
89 Fat.44.146 michael j. white
cosmos.Asrationalagents,‘fragments’ofdivinereason,wecanthink
ofourselvesasministersofthedivinereasonconstitutingtheruling
principle or to heˆgemonikon of the cosmos. In fact, Chrysippus is
depictedbyCiceroasarguingfromthedignityandworthofman(by
implicitappealtotheStoicpremisethatawholecannotbe‘inferior’
toanyofitsparts)totheconclusionthatgodexists:
forin[man]alonethereisreason,thanwhichthereisnothingmoreexcellent
that can exist. But for there to be some man who believes that there is
nothing in all the world that is better than himself is foolish arrogance.
Therefore,godcertainlyexists.90
7. anticorpuscularianism
and cosmic cohesion
At the time of the founding of the Stoa, Aristotle had worked out
a detailed conceptual account of change. But since appeal to incor-
poreal forms was central to the Aristotelian account (as were such
distinctively Aristotelian metaphysical notions as potentiality and
actuality), such an account likely would not have found favor with
theearlyStoics.Thematerialistaccountofchangeonofferwascor-
puscularian–thatofthePresocraticandEpicureanatomists.Butthis
sortofaccount,too,wouldseemtoviolatefundamentalStoiccom-
mitments concerning the unity and cohesion of the cosmos. Since
eachcorpuscle(atom)isquiteseparateandself-contained,separated
from other atoms by void, there is a very literal sense in which the
constituents of the cosmos do not constitute a cohesive unity. The
Stoicresponsewastodevelopananti-corpuscularianformofmateri-
alism,inwhichthebodyconstitutingthecosmosischaracterizedby
a seamless, radical continuity. One well-attested corollary of Stoic
anticorpuscularianismwasthepeculiarStoicdoctrineoftotalblend-
ing(krasisdi’holoˆn).Another,forwhichtheevidenceismuchmore
speculative, is the elimination of ‘sharp divisions’ in the form of
limitssuchassurfacesfromthecosmos.
The former doctrine of total blending is criticized as paradoxical
byAlexanderofAphrodisiasinhisDemixtioneandbyPlutarchinDe
communibusnotitiisadversusStoicos.Alexanderassociatesitwith
the Stoic doctrine of the radical continuity of matter – with those
90 Cicero,NDII16.StoicNaturalPhilosophy(PhysicsandCosmology) 147
‘who say that matter is completely unified and who hold that it is
one and the same for all those things that come to be’.91 According
to Alexander, there is some difference of opinion among the Stoics
pertaining to mixture. He proceeds to concentrate on the doctrine
of Chrysippus, reporting that although Chrysippus holds that all of
the cosmos or substance (ousia) is unified because of the pneuma
(mixtureoffireandair)permeatingthroughallofit,henevertheless
distinguishes three kinds of mixture of bodies within the cosmos.
Onekindissimplythejuxtaposition(parathesis)ofsizeable‘chunks’
of different stuffs (beans and grains of wheat, in Chrysippus’ exam-
ple), which Chrysippus says occurs by ‘fitting together’ or juncture
(harmeˆ) and in which each constituent preserves its proper nature
andquality.Ofcourse,fromanatomistperspective,allmixture,and
hence all change, occurs by such corpuscularian juxtaposition. An-
other sort of mixture is total combination (sunkrisis di’ holoˆn), in
whichtheconstituentsubstancesandthequalitiestheycontainare
altogetherdestroyedinordertoproducesomethingqualitativelydis-
tinct from the constituents. Alexander does not accord this type of
Chrysippean mixture much attention, but it must have been con-
ceived by the Stoics as the total replacement, in a given material
substratum, of one set of qualitative determinations by another –
where ‘qualitative determination’ is itself conceived in corporeal
terms(e.g.,asdifferentdegreesof‘tension’ofmatter).Thethirdtype
of mixture is total blending (krasis di’ holoˆn) or blending proper,
the‘interpenetrationoftwoormorebodiesinsuchawaythateach
preservesitsownpropernatureandownqualitiesinthemixture’.92
Itisthislastkindofmixture,totalblending,thatbothAlexander
andPlutarchcriticizeasparticularlyparadoxical.Alexanderreports
whatmaywellhavebeenChrysippus’accountoftotalblending:
thecommingledbodiesgothroughoneanother(choˆrountoˆndi’alleˆlon)in
suchawaythatthereisnopartofthemthatdoesnotpartakeofeverything
insuchablendedmixture.Ifthiswerenotthecase,thentheresultwould
nolongerbeablending(krasin)butratherajuxtaposition(parathesin).93
The idea seems to be that, no matter how small a three-
dimensional spatial area occupied by such a total blending one
91 AlexanderofAphrodisias,Mixt.216,1–2.=SVF2.470.
92 Mixt.216,28–31=SVF2.473.
93 Mixt.217,10–13=SVF2.473.148 michael j. white
considers,suchanareaisoccupiedbyalltheconstituentsofthemix-
ture.Consequently,suchatotalblendingcannotbeconceivedasbe-
ingconstitutedofverysmallbutseparatedcorpuscles,bits,globules,
ordropletsoftheoriginalblendedelements.Foriftherewerewithin
the blend such corpuscles, each with its own surface, of the origi-
nal blended elements, there would be a certain three-dimensional
spatialmagnitudebelowwhichtheelementswouldnotbecommin-
gled. Alexander points out that a consequence of this view is that
nopartoftheoriginalconstituentsintheblendingcanhaveitsown
surface(epiphaneia).Hearguesthatthisfactentailsthattheoriginal
constituents in the blend would not be preserved and would not be
capable of being separated out – as Chrysippus had claimed – but
wouldbe‘jointlyfusedanddestroyed’.94 Intheseargumentsagainst
theintelligibilityoftheStoicdoctrineoftotalblending,itisclaimed
that the idea of the existence of surfaces (of supposed corpuscles of
constituentelementsorbodies)inamixtureisinconsistentwiththe
Stoicconceptionoftotalblending.PerhapsoneradicalStoicresponse
tosuchcriticismwouldhavebeentodoawaywiththe‘physicalre-
ality’ofsurfacesaltogether,anissuetowhichIshallsoonreturn.
However,itseemsthat,amongthevariouscriticismsoftheStoic
doctrine of total blending, the principal one is that it contradicts
quantitative facts about mixing substances together. The doctrine
of total blending apparently implies that each constituent stuff or
body be the receptacle of the other. Critics of the doctrine assume
thatthismeansthatthespatialvolumeofeachconstituentquantity
of stuff be the receptacle of the other. So, as Plutarch puts it, if one
ladleofwineistobetotallyblendedwithtwoofwater,thewinewill
have both the volume of one ladle (because that is what one begins
with)butalsothevolumeoftwoladles‘byequalizationofblending’
(teˆskraseoˆsexisoˆsei),becausethatisthevolumeofthewaterwhich
supposedlybecomesthereceptacleofthewinethatistotallyblended
withit.95 Plutarchtakesthistobeaparadoxicalconsequenceofthe
doctrine of those who ‘stuff bodies into body’.96 Plotinus reports a
similar criticism. The fact that a mixture (typically) occupies more
spacethanthatofeitherofitsconstituentstuffs–namely,thatofthe
sumofthespacesofitsconstituents–tellsagainsttheStoicdoctrine
94 Mixt.220,37–221,15.
95 Plutarch,Comm.not.1078a.
96 Comm.not.1078b.StoicNaturalPhilosophy(PhysicsandCosmology) 149
oftotalblending.Forifthereweretotalblending,thespaceoccupied
bythetotallyblendedcompoundshouldremainthesameasthatof
theconstituentstuff–butwhichone?97
Although there is no record of any Stoic response to this sort of
criticism, a possible response emphasizes the distinction between
two conceptions of quantity. In one sense of ‘quantity’, something
likethecontemporarysenseof‘mass’,thequantityofabodyorstuff
remainsconstantthroughvariouschanges.Inanothersenseof‘quan-
tity’, something like the sense of ‘volume’, quantity is quite vari-
able:thesamemassofstuff(e.g.,ofH O)canassume,inundergoing
2
variousprocessesofchange,quitedifferentspatialvolumes(e.g.,as
ice, water, and steam). As I have previously suggested, it is open to
Chrysippus to maintain that total blending is one such process of
change that can result in the same mass assuming different spatial
volumes.Soitisnotaprioriabsurdtoarguethat
before a total blending a quantity (mass sense) of wine possesses a certain
volume(viz.,adrop).Afterbeingtotallyblendedwiththeoceanwater,the
samequantity(masssense)ofwinepossessesamuchgreatervolume(viz.,
oneequaltothatoftheoceanwaterandalsotothatofthetotallyblended
oceanwater-and-wine).98
We are inclined to assume that the volume of two quantities of
stuff that have been blended should simply be the numerical sum
of the volumes of the two quantities of stuff before being blended.
But there is no a priori reason why this assumption should be true.
The existence of such a common belief is no doubt the result of
experience. But, as Sharvy has pointed out, experience sometimes
falsifiesthisassumption:mixing10cc.ofwaterwith10cc.ofalcohol
yieldsabout19cc.ofmixture.99
Accustomed as we are to physical theories that assume some
quantumstructureorotherofmatter,Stoicanticorpuscularianism–
the doctrine that material stuffs have a radically continuous struc-
ture – may strike us as a peculiar and, perhaps, unpromising basis
for physics. However, it is far from clear that such an assumption
yieldsinternalinconsistenciesthatcanleadtoits apriori rejection
in the ways suggested by Alexander, Plutarch, and Plotinus. And,
97 Plotinus,EnneadesII7.1=SVF2.478.
98 White(1986),386.
99 Sharvy(1983),451.150 michael j. white
for the Stoics, anti-corpuscularianism was surely an important
manifestationoftheircommitmenttocosmicunityandcohesion.
It is also possible that a Stoic doctrine pertaining to limits (e.g.,
surfaces,edges,andboundaries)wascloselylinkedtotheircommit-
ment to cosmic cohesion and to their anti-corpscularianism. There
is a fair amount of evidence for a Stoic doctrine which denied that
limits possess corporeal status. Proclus reports that the Stoics held
that limits ‘subsist in mere thought’ (kat’ epinoian psileˆn huph-
estanai).100 Plutarch evidently interprets this doctrine as implying
that limits belong to the Stoic ontological category of incorporeals
(asoˆmata),andconsequentlyarenottobereckonedamongthethings
thatexist.101 However,DiogenesLaertiusmentionsthatPosidonius
maintained that surface (epiphaneia) exists ‘both in thought and in
reality’(kaikat’epinoiankaikath’hupostasin),102andseemstosug-
gestthat,incontrast,themoreorthodoxStoicviewwasthatsurfaces
andothersuchlimitsexistonlyinintellectu.LongandSedleyspec-
ulatethat‘theStoicsregardedlimitsasmentalconstructs...,andas
suchtheymaywellhaveseenthemasfallingaltogetheroutsidethe
corporeal-incorporealdichotomy’.103Infact,theysuggestthatlimits
belong in their own Stoic ontological category, which also includes
fictional entities.104 It is surely possible to interpret the Stoic doc-
trineofsurfacesandsuchlimitsasnomorethantheobviousandnot
very portentous claim that, since such entities lack one or more of
thethreedimensionscharacterizingbodies,theycannotbecorporeal
andhence(accordingtotheStoicidentificationofwhatiscorporeal
withwhatexists)donotexist.However,bothLongandSedleyandI
haveentertainedthestrongerhypothesisofaStoicdoctrineaccord-
ing to which limit entities, as ‘mental constructs’, are ‘geometers’
fictions, and hence involve a degree of misrepresentation’ of physi-
calreality.105 Brunschwighassuggestedyetanotherpossibility,that
limitsbelongoutsideofthecategoryof‘something’altogether.They
‘could be considered as purely mental constructions with no objec-
tivereality,thatistosay,asNSTs[notsomethings]’.106
100 Proclus,InprimumEuclidiselementorumlibrumcommentarii89.16.
101 Plutarch,Comm.not.1080e.
102 DLVII135.
103 LongandSedley(1987),Vol.1,301.
104 Seethe‘stemma’ofStoicontologicaldistinctionsinLongandSedley(1987),Vol.
1,163.
105 White(1992),286.
106 Brunschwig(1994a),97.StoicNaturalPhilosophy(PhysicsandCosmology) 151
Ihaveelsewhereattemptedtodevelopinsomewhatgreaterdetail
anaccountofthephysicalimplicationsofaninterpretationoflimits
that minimizes or denies their reality. That account uses some ba-
sicconceptsdrawnfromcontemporary‘fuzzy’point-settopology.107
Fromarelativelynontechnicalperspective,
theStoicremovaloflimitentitiesfromthephysicalworldresultsinasort
of intuitive or ‘pre-analytical continuity’ of to holon, the entire physical
cosmos.Onephysicalobjectissotopologicallyinterconnectedwithitsen-
vironmentthattherearenojoints,sotospeak,betweenthem;theyinsen-
siblyblendintooneanother...[C]ontinuityinthisintuitivesenseistobe
thought of not just as an epistemic limitation but as an ontological fact
deriving from the removal of limit entities from the physical world and
theontologicalindeterminacyintroducedbytheeliminationofsuchlimits
kath’hupostasin.108
Of course, such an interpretation of the Stoic doctrine of limits
is highly speculative. However, as noted toward the beginning of
thischapter,theimportanceaccordedbyDiogenesLaertiusto‘lim-
its’ (perata) in his account of Stoic taxonomy of the subdivisions
ofphysicssuggeststhatsomethingfairlyimportantandperhapsex-
traordinary was going on with respect to the Stoic conception of
limits. The conception of all such limit entities as geometrical fic-
tions,inthesensethathasjustbeenspecified,wouldcertainlyseem
to be a rather important and extraordinary conception. If, in fact,
suchaconceptionwasdevelopedbytheStoics,thereislittledoubt
that it was yet another manifestation of Stoic commitment to cos-
mic unity and cohesion. In that regard I heartily concur with the
rationale given by Brunschwig for his placing of limits in the ‘cate-
gory’ of ‘not something’: such an account, he says, ‘is the one that
seemsthemostplausible,bearinginmindtheStoics’fundamentally
continuisticconceptionofthephysicaluniverse’.109
8. conclusion
Much of the evidence that we possess concerning Stoic physics or
naturalphilosophycomesfromhostilesources,thepurposeofwhich,
inmanycases,istomakeStoicdoctrineappeartobeeitherinternally
107 SeeWhite(1992),Ch.7.
108 White(1992),324–325.
109 Brunschwig(1994a),97.152 michael j. white
incoherentoratoddswithcommonsense.Theenduringexegetical
problem,then,iswhetherthisevidence,despiteitsobviouslypreju-
dicialcharacter,istobeinterpretedasamoreorlessaccurateaccount
ofStoicdoctrineorwhetheritisusuallyadistortionormisrepresen-
tationofStoicdoctrine.Itseemsunlikelythatthisissuecaneverbe
completelyadequatelyresolved,evenwithrespecttoasinglesource
such as Plutarch or Alexander of Aphrodisias or Origen. Thus, we
areleftwithanexegeticalchoice.
If we elect, at least initially, not to appeal to the hypothesis of
thoroughgoingmisunderstandingormisrepresentationofStoicnat-
ural philosophy, we must still deal with what often will strike us
as counterintuitive or strange doctrines in what these sources tell
usaboutStoicphysicaldoctrines.Placingsuchdoctrineswithinthe
context of fundamental Stoic ‘prior commitments’ frequently has
the effect of mitigating their peculiarity. It seems particularly im-
portanttoremindourselvesfrequentlythat,asHellenisticthinkers,
theStoicsheldthatallhumanknowledgeisultimately‘practical’in
thesenseofinformingusofthebestwaytoliveourlives.‘Physics’
ornaturalphilosophyisinnowaytobeexcludedfromthisclaim.